docs/appendix/python-asyncio.rst, before:

.. meta::
    :keywords: Python, Python3, Asyncio, socket

=========================================
The Evolution of Asynchronous Programming
=========================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :backlinks: none

Abstract
--------

The `C10k problem`_ is still a puzzle for a programmer to find a way to solve
it. Generally, developers deal with extensive I/O operations via **thread**,
**epoll**, or **kqueue** to avoid their software waiting for an expensive task.
However, developing a readable and bug-free concurrent code is challenging due
to data sharing and job dependency. Even though some powerful tools, such as
`Valgrind`_, help developers to detect deadlock or other asynchronous issues,
solving these problems may be time-consuming when the scale of software grows
large. Therefore, many programming languages such as Python, Javascript, or C++
dedicated to developing better libraries, frameworks, or syntaxes to assist
programmers in managing concurrent jobs properly. Instead of focusing on how to
use modern parallel APIs, this article mainly concentrates on the design
philosophy behind programming patterns.

Introduction
------------

Handling I/O operations such as network connections is one of the most expensive
tasks in a program. Take a simple TCP blocking echo server as an example
(The following snippet). If a client connects to the server successfully without
sending any request, it blocks others' connections. Even though clients send data
as soon as possible, the server cannot handle other requests if there is no
client tries to establish a connection. Also, handling multiple requests is
inefficient because it wastes a lot of time waiting for I/O responses from
hardware such as network interfaces. Thus, socket programming with concurrency
becomes inevitable to manage extensive requests.

.. code-block:: python

    import socket

    s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM, 0)
    s.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
    s.bind(("127.0.0.1", 5566))
    s.listen(10)

    while True:
        conn, addr = s.accept()
        msg = conn.recv(1024)
        conn.send(msg)

One possible solution to prevent a server waiting for I/O operations is to
dispatch tasks to other threads. The following example shows how to create a
thread to handle connections simultaneously. However, creating numerous threads
may consume all computing power without high throughput. Even worse, an
application may waste time waiting for a lock to process critical sections within
a thread. Although using threads can solve blocking issues for a socket server,
other factors, such as CPU utilization, are essential for a programmer to
overcome the C10k problem. Therefore, without creating unlimited threads, the
event loop is another solution to manage connections.

.. code-block:: python

    import threading
    import socket

    s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
    s.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
    s.bind(("127.0.0.1", 5566))
    s.listen(10240)

    def handler(conn):
        while True:
            msg = conn.recv(65535)
            conn.send(msg)

    while True:
        conn, addr = s.accept()
        t = threading.Thread(target=handler, args=(conn,))
        t.start()

A simple event-driven socket server includes three main components: an I/O
multiplexing module (e.g., `select`_), a scheduler (loop), and callback
functions (events). For example, the following server utilizes the high-level
I/O multiplexing, `selectors`_, within a loop to check whether an I/O operation
is ready or not. If data is available to read/write, the loop acquires I/O
events and execute callback functions, ``accept``, ``read``, or ``write``, to
finish tasks.

.. code-block:: python

    import socket

    from selectors import DefaultSelector
    from selectors import EVENT_READ, EVENT_WRITE
    from functools import partial

    s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
    s.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
    s.bind(("127.0.0.1", 5566))
    s.listen(10240)
    s.setblocking(False)

    sel = DefaultSelector()

    def accept(s, mask):
        conn, addr = s.accept()
        conn.setblocking(False)
        sel.register(conn, EVENT_READ, read)

    def read(conn, mask):
        msg = conn.recv(65535)
        if msg:
            sel.modify(conn, EVENT_WRITE, partial(write, msg=msg))
        else:
            sel.unregister(conn)
            conn.close()

    def write(conn, mask, msg=None):
        if msg:
            conn.send(msg)
        sel.modify(conn, EVENT_READ, read)

    sel.register(s, EVENT_READ, accept)
    while True:
        events = sel.select()
        for e, m in events:
            cb = e.data
            cb(e.fileobj, m)

What is Coroutine?
-------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    import inspect
    from functools import wraps

    Future = asyncio.futures.Future
    def coroutine(func):
        """Simple prototype of coroutine"""
        @wraps(func)
        def coro(*a, **k):
            res = func(*a, **k)
            if isinstance(res, Future) or inspect.isgenerator(res):
                res = yield from res
            return res
        return coro

    @coroutine
    def foo():
        yield from asyncio.sleep(1)
        print("Hello Foo")

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def bar():
        print("Hello Bar")

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    tasks = [loop.create_task(foo()),
             loop.create_task(bar())]
    loop.run_until_complete(
         asyncio.wait(tasks))
    loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python test.py
    Hello Bar
    Hello Foo


What is Task?
--------------

.. code-block:: python

    # goal: supervise coroutine run state
    # ref: asyncio/tasks.py

    import asyncio
    Future = asyncio.futures.Future

    class Task(Future):
        """Simple prototype of Task"""

        def __init__(self, gen, *, loop):
            super().__init__(loop=loop)
            self._gen = gen
            self._loop.call_soon(self._step)

        def _step(self, val=None, exc=None):
            try:
                if exc:
                    f = self._gen.throw(exc)
                else:
                    f = self._gen.send(val)
            except StopIteration as e:
                self.set_result(e.value)
            except Exception as e:
                self.set_exception(e)
            else:
                f.add_done_callback(
                     self._wakeup)

        def _wakeup(self, fut):
            try:
                res = fut.result()
            except Exception as e:
                self._step(None, e)
            else:
                self._step(res, None)

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def foo():
        yield from asyncio.sleep(3)
        print("Hello Foo")

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def bar():
        yield from asyncio.sleep(1)
        print("Hello Bar")

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    tasks = [Task(foo(), loop=loop),
             loop.create_task(bar())]
    loop.run_until_complete(
            asyncio.wait(tasks))
    loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python test.py
    Hello Bar
    hello Foo

How does event loop work?
-------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    from collections import deque

    def done_callback(fut):
        fut._loop.stop()

    class Loop:
        """Simple event loop prototype"""

        def __init__(self):
            self._ready = deque()
            self._stopping = False

        def create_task(self, coro):
            Task = asyncio.tasks.Task
            task = Task(coro, loop=self)
            return task

        def run_until_complete(self, fut):
            tasks = asyncio.tasks
            # get task
            fut = tasks.ensure_future(
                        fut, loop=self)
            # add task to ready queue
            fut.add_done_callback(done_callback)
            # run tasks
            self.run_forever()
            # remove task from ready queue
            fut.remove_done_callback(done_callback)

        def run_forever(self):
            """Run tasks until stop"""
            try:
                while True:
                    self._run_once()
                    if self._stopping:
                        break
            finally:
                self._stopping = False

        def call_soon(self, cb, *args):
            """Append task to ready queue"""
            self._ready.append((cb, args))
        def call_exception_handler(self, c):
            pass

        def _run_once(self):
            """Run task at once"""
            ntodo = len(self._ready)
            for i in range(ntodo):
                t, a = self._ready.popleft()
                t(*a)

        def stop(self):
            self._stopping = True

        def close(self):
            self._ready.clear()

        def get_debug(self):
            return False

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def foo():
        print("Foo")

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def bar():
        print("Bar")

    loop = Loop()
    tasks = [loop.create_task(foo()),
             loop.create_task(bar())]
    loop.run_until_complete(
            asyncio.wait(tasks))
    loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python test.py
    Foo
    Bar


How does ``asyncio.wait`` work?
--------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio

    async def wait(fs, loop=None):
        fs = {asyncio.ensure_future(_) for _ in set(fs)}
        if loop is None:
            loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()

        waiter = loop.create_future()
        counter = len(fs)

        def _on_complete(f):
            nonlocal counter
            counter -= 1
            if counter <= 0 and not waiter.done():
                 waiter.set_result(None)

        for f in fs:
            f.add_done_callback(_on_complete)

        # wait all tasks done
        await waiter

        done, pending = set(), set()
        for f in fs:
            f.remove_done_callback(_on_complete)
            if f.done():
                done.add(f)
            else:
                pending.add(f)
        return done, pending

    async def slow_task(n):
        await asyncio.sleep(n)
        print('sleep "{}" sec'.format(n))

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()

    try:
        print("---> wait")
        loop.run_until_complete(
                wait([slow_task(_) for _ in range(1, 3)]))
        print("---> asyncio.wait")
        loop.run_until_complete(
                asyncio.wait([slow_task(_) for _ in range(1, 3)]))
    finally:
        loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: bash

    ---> wait
    sleep "1" sec
    sleep "2" sec
    ---> asyncio.wait
    sleep "1" sec
    sleep "2" sec

Simple asyncio.run
-------------------

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import asyncio
    >>> async def getaddrinfo(host, port):
    ...     loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    ...     return (await loop.getaddrinfo(host, port))
    ...
    >>> def run(main):
    ...     loop = asyncio.new_event_loop()
    ...     asyncio.set_event_loop(loop)
    ...     return loop.run_until_complete(main)
    ...
    >>> ret = run(getaddrinfo('google.com', 443))
    >>> ret = asyncio.run(getaddrinfo('google.com', 443))

How does ``loop.sock_*`` work?
-------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    import socket

    def sock_accept(self, sock, fut=None, registed=False):
        fd = sock.fileno()
        if fut is None:
            fut = self.create_future()
        if registed:
            self.remove_reader(fd)
        try:
            conn, addr = sock.accept()
            conn.setblocking(False)
        except (BlockingIOError, InterruptedError):
            self.add_reader(fd, self.sock_accept, sock, fut, True)
        except Exception as e:
            fut.set_exception(e)
        else:
            fut.set_result((conn, addr))
        return fut

    def sock_recv(self, sock, n, fut=None, registed=False):
        fd = sock.fileno()
        if fut is None:
            fut = self.create_future()
        if registed:
            self.remove_reader(fd)
        try:
            data = sock.recv(n)
        except (BlockingIOError, InterruptedError):
            self.add_reader(fd, self.sock_recv, sock, n, fut, True)
        except Exception as e:
            fut.set_exception(e)
        else:
            fut.set_result(data)
        return fut

    def sock_sendall(self, sock, data, fut=None, registed=False):
        fd = sock.fileno()
        if fut is None:
            fut = self.create_future()
        if registed:
            self.remove_writer(fd)
        try:
            n = sock.send(data)
        except (BlockingIOError, InterruptedError):
            n = 0
        except Exception as e:
            fut.set_exception(e)
            return
        if n == len(data):
            fut.set_result(None)
        else:
            if n:
                data = data[n:]
            self.add_writer(fd, sock, data, fut, True)
        return fut

    async def handler(loop, conn):
        while True:
            msg = await loop.sock_recv(conn, 1024)
            if msg: await loop.sock_sendall(conn, msg)
            else: break
        conn.close()

    async def server(loop):
        sock = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM, 0)
        sock.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
        sock.setblocking(False)
        sock.bind(('localhost', 9527))
        sock.listen(10)

        while True:
            conn, addr = await loop.sock_accept(sock)
            loop.create_task(handler(loop, conn))

    EventLoop = asyncio.SelectorEventLoop
    EventLoop.sock_accept = sock_accept
    EventLoop.sock_recv = sock_recv
    EventLoop.sock_sendall = sock_sendall
    loop = EventLoop()

    try:
        loop.run_until_complete(server(loop))
    except KeyboardInterrupt:
        pass
    finally:
        loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: bash

    # console 1
    $ python3 async_sock.py &
    $ nc localhost 9527
    Hello
    Hello

    # console 2
    $ nc localhost 9527
    asyncio
    asyncio


How does ``loop.create_server`` work?
-------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    import socket

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()

    async def create_server(loop, protocol_factory, host,
                            port, *args, **kwargs):
       sock = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET,
                            socket.SOCK_STREAM, 0)
       sock.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET,
                       socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
       sock.setblocking(False)
       sock.bind((host, port))
       sock.listen(10)
       sockets = [sock]
       server = asyncio.base_events.Server(loop, sockets)
       loop._start_serving(protocol_factory, sock, None, server)

       return server


    class EchoProtocol(asyncio.Protocol):
        def connection_made(self, transport):
            peername = transport.get_extra_info('peername')
            print('Connection from {}'.format(peername))
            self.transport = transport

        def data_received(self, data):
            message = data.decode()
            self.transport.write(data)

    # Equal to: loop.create_server(EchoProtocol,
    #                              'localhost', 5566)
    coro = create_server(loop, EchoProtocol, 'localhost', 5566)
    server = loop.run_until_complete(coro)

    try:
        loop.run_forever()
    finally:
        server.close()
        loop.run_until_complete(server.wait_closed())
        loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: bash

    # console1
    $ nc localhost 5566
    Hello
    Hello

    # console2
    $ nc localhost 5566
    asyncio
    asyncio

.. _C10k problem: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C10k_problem
.. _Valgrind: https://valgrind.org/
.. _select: https://docs.python.org/3/library/select.html
.. _selectors: https://docs.python.org/3/library/selectors.html

Commit message:

Add desc in introduction of async programming
Signed-off-by: chang-ning <spiderpower02@gmail.com>

docs/appendix/python-asyncio.rst, after:

.. meta::
    :keywords: Python, Python3, Asyncio, socket

=========================================
The Evolution of Asynchronous Programming
=========================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :backlinks: none

Abstract
--------

The `C10k problem`_ is still a puzzle for a programmer to find a way to solve
it. Generally, developers deal with extensive I/O operations via **thread**,
**epoll**, or **kqueue** to avoid their software waiting for an expensive task.
However, developing a readable and bug-free concurrent code is challenging due
to data sharing and job dependency. Even though some powerful tools, such as
`Valgrind`_, help developers to detect deadlock or other asynchronous issues,
solving these problems may be time-consuming when the scale of software grows
large. Therefore, many programming languages such as Python, Javascript, or C++
dedicated to developing better libraries, frameworks, or syntaxes to assist
programmers in managing concurrent jobs properly. Instead of focusing on how to
use modern parallel APIs, this article mainly concentrates on the design
philosophy behind programming patterns.

Introduction
------------

Handling I/O operations such as network connections is one of the most expensive
tasks in a program. Take a simple TCP blocking echo server as an example
(The following snippet). If a client connects to the server successfully without
sending any request, it blocks others' connections. Even though clients send data
as soon as possible, the server cannot handle other requests if there is no
client tries to establish a connection. Also, handling multiple requests is
inefficient because it wastes a lot of time waiting for I/O responses from
hardware such as network interfaces. Thus, socket programming with concurrency
becomes inevitable to manage extensive requests.

.. code-block:: python

    import socket

    s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM, 0)
    s.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
    s.bind(("127.0.0.1", 5566))
    s.listen(10)

    while True:
        conn, addr = s.accept()
        msg = conn.recv(1024)
        conn.send(msg)

One possible solution to prevent a server waiting for I/O operations is to
dispatch tasks to other threads. The following example shows how to create a
thread to handle connections simultaneously. However, creating numerous threads
may consume all computing power without high throughput. Even worse, an
application may waste time waiting for a lock to process critical sections within
a thread. Although using threads can solve blocking issues for a socket server,
other factors, such as CPU utilization, are essential for a programmer to
overcome the C10k problem. Therefore, without creating unlimited threads, the
event loop is another solution to manage connections.

.. code-block:: python

    import threading
    import socket

    s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
    s.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
    s.bind(("127.0.0.1", 5566))
    s.listen(10240)

    def handler(conn):
        while True:
            msg = conn.recv(65535)
            conn.send(msg)

    while True:
        conn, addr = s.accept()
        t = threading.Thread(target=handler, args=(conn,))
        t.start()

A simple event-driven socket server includes three main components: an I/O
multiplexing module (e.g., `select`_), a scheduler (loop), and callback
functions (events). For example, the following server utilizes the high-level
I/O multiplexing, `selectors`_, within a loop to check whether an I/O operation
is ready or not. If data is available to read/write, the loop acquires I/O
events and execute callback functions, ``accept``, ``read``, or ``write``, to
finish tasks.

.. code-block:: python

    import socket

    from selectors import DefaultSelector
    from selectors import EVENT_READ, EVENT_WRITE
    from functools import partial

    s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
    s.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
    s.bind(("127.0.0.1", 5566))
    s.listen(10240)
    s.setblocking(False)

    sel = DefaultSelector()

    def accept(s, mask):
        conn, addr = s.accept()
        conn.setblocking(False)
        sel.register(conn, EVENT_READ, read)

    def read(conn, mask):
        msg = conn.recv(65535)
        if msg:
            sel.modify(conn, EVENT_WRITE, partial(write, msg=msg))
        else:
            sel.unregister(conn)
            conn.close()

    def write(conn, mask, msg=None):
        if msg:
            conn.send(msg)
        sel.modify(conn, EVENT_READ, read)

    sel.register(s, EVENT_READ, accept)
    while True:
        events = sel.select()
        for e, m in events:
            cb = e.data
            cb(e.fileobj, m)

Although managing connections via threads may not be efficient, a program that
utilizes an event loop to schedule tasks isn’t easy to read. To enhance code
readability, many programming languages, including Python, introduce abstract
concepts such as coroutine, future, or async/await to handle I/O multiplexing.
To better understand programming jargon and using them correctly, the following
sections discuss what these concepts are and what kind of problems they try to
solve.

What is Coroutine?
-------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    import inspect
    from functools import wraps

    Future = asyncio.futures.Future
    def coroutine(func):
        """Simple prototype of coroutine"""
        @wraps(func)
        def coro(*a, **k):
            res = func(*a, **k)
            if isinstance(res, Future) or inspect.isgenerator(res):
                res = yield from res
            return res
        return coro

    @coroutine
    def foo():
        yield from asyncio.sleep(1)
        print("Hello Foo")

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def bar():
        print("Hello Bar")

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    tasks = [loop.create_task(foo()),
             loop.create_task(bar())]
    loop.run_until_complete(
         asyncio.wait(tasks))
    loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python test.py
    Hello Bar
    Hello Foo


What is Task?
--------------

.. code-block:: python

    # goal: supervise coroutine run state
    # ref: asyncio/tasks.py

    import asyncio
    Future = asyncio.futures.Future

    class Task(Future):
        """Simple prototype of Task"""

        def __init__(self, gen, *, loop):
            super().__init__(loop=loop)
            self._gen = gen
            self._loop.call_soon(self._step)

        def _step(self, val=None, exc=None):
            try:
                if exc:
                    f = self._gen.throw(exc)
                else:
                    f = self._gen.send(val)
            except StopIteration as e:
                self.set_result(e.value)
            except Exception as e:
                self.set_exception(e)
            else:
                f.add_done_callback(
                     self._wakeup)

        def _wakeup(self, fut):
            try:
                res = fut.result()
            except Exception as e:
                self._step(None, e)
            else:
                self._step(res, None)

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def foo():
        yield from asyncio.sleep(3)
        print("Hello Foo")

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def bar():
        yield from asyncio.sleep(1)
        print("Hello Bar")

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    tasks = [Task(foo(), loop=loop),
             loop.create_task(bar())]
    loop.run_until_complete(
            asyncio.wait(tasks))
    loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python test.py
    Hello Bar
    hello Foo

How does event loop work?
-------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    from collections import deque

    def done_callback(fut):
        fut._loop.stop()

    class Loop:
        """Simple event loop prototype"""

        def __init__(self):
            self._ready = deque()
            self._stopping = False

        def create_task(self, coro):
            Task = asyncio.tasks.Task
            task = Task(coro, loop=self)
            return task

        def run_until_complete(self, fut):
            tasks = asyncio.tasks
            # get task
            fut = tasks.ensure_future(
                        fut, loop=self)
            # add task to ready queue
            fut.add_done_callback(done_callback)
            # run tasks
            self.run_forever()
            # remove task from ready queue
            fut.remove_done_callback(done_callback)

        def run_forever(self):
            """Run tasks until stop"""
            try:
                while True:
                    self._run_once()
                    if self._stopping:
                        break
            finally:
                self._stopping = False

        def call_soon(self, cb, *args):
            """Append task to ready queue"""
            self._ready.append((cb, args))
        def call_exception_handler(self, c):
            pass

        def _run_once(self):
            """Run task at once"""
            ntodo = len(self._ready)
            for i in range(ntodo):
                t, a = self._ready.popleft()
                t(*a)

        def stop(self):
            self._stopping = True

        def close(self):
            self._ready.clear()

        def get_debug(self):
            return False

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def foo():
        print("Foo")

    @asyncio.coroutine
    def bar():
        print("Bar")

    loop = Loop()
    tasks = [loop.create_task(foo()),
             loop.create_task(bar())]
    loop.run_until_complete(
            asyncio.wait(tasks))
    loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python test.py
    Foo
    Bar


How does ``asyncio.wait`` work?
--------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio

    async def wait(fs, loop=None):
        fs = {asyncio.ensure_future(_) for _ in set(fs)}
        if loop is None:
            loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()

        waiter = loop.create_future()
        counter = len(fs)

        def _on_complete(f):
            nonlocal counter
            counter -= 1
            if counter <= 0 and not waiter.done():
                 waiter.set_result(None)

        for f in fs:
            f.add_done_callback(_on_complete)

        # wait all tasks done
        await waiter

        done, pending = set(), set()
        for f in fs:
            f.remove_done_callback(_on_complete)
            if f.done():
                done.add(f)
            else:
                pending.add(f)
        return done, pending

    async def slow_task(n):
        await asyncio.sleep(n)
        print('sleep "{}" sec'.format(n))

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()

    try:
        print("---> wait")
        loop.run_until_complete(
                wait([slow_task(_) for _ in range(1, 3)]))
        print("---> asyncio.wait")
        loop.run_until_complete(
                asyncio.wait([slow_task(_) for _ in range(1, 3)]))
    finally:
        loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: bash

    ---> wait
    sleep "1" sec
    sleep "2" sec
    ---> asyncio.wait
    sleep "1" sec
    sleep "2" sec

Simple asyncio.run
-------------------

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import asyncio
    >>> async def getaddrinfo(host, port):
    ...     loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    ...     return (await loop.getaddrinfo(host, port))
    ...
    >>> def run(main):
    ...     loop = asyncio.new_event_loop()
    ...     asyncio.set_event_loop(loop)
    ...     return loop.run_until_complete(main)
    ...
    >>> ret = run(getaddrinfo('google.com', 443))
    >>> ret = asyncio.run(getaddrinfo('google.com', 443))

How does ``loop.sock_*`` work?
-------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    import socket

    def sock_accept(self, sock, fut=None, registed=False):
        fd = sock.fileno()
        if fut is None:
            fut = self.create_future()
        if registed:
            self.remove_reader(fd)
        try:
            conn, addr = sock.accept()
            conn.setblocking(False)
        except (BlockingIOError, InterruptedError):
            self.add_reader(fd, self.sock_accept, sock, fut, True)
        except Exception as e:
            fut.set_exception(e)
        else:
            fut.set_result((conn, addr))
        return fut

    def sock_recv(self, sock, n, fut=None, registed=False):
        fd = sock.fileno()
        if fut is None:
            fut = self.create_future()
        if registed:
            self.remove_reader(fd)
        try:
            data = sock.recv(n)
        except (BlockingIOError, InterruptedError):
            self.add_reader(fd, self.sock_recv, sock, n, fut, True)
        except Exception as e:
            fut.set_exception(e)
        else:
            fut.set_result(data)
        return fut

    def sock_sendall(self, sock, data, fut=None, registed=False):
        fd = sock.fileno()
        if fut is None:
            fut = self.create_future()
        if registed:
            self.remove_writer(fd)
        try:
            n = sock.send(data)
        except (BlockingIOError, InterruptedError):
            n = 0
        except Exception as e:
            fut.set_exception(e)
            return
        if n == len(data):
            fut.set_result(None)
        else:
            if n:
                data = data[n:]
            self.add_writer(fd, sock, data, fut, True)
        return fut

    async def handler(loop, conn):
        while True:
            msg = await loop.sock_recv(conn, 1024)
            if msg: await loop.sock_sendall(conn, msg)
            else: break
        conn.close()

    async def server(loop):
        sock = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM, 0)
        sock.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET, socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
        sock.setblocking(False)
        sock.bind(('localhost', 9527))
        sock.listen(10)

        while True:
            conn, addr = await loop.sock_accept(sock)
            loop.create_task(handler(loop, conn))

    EventLoop = asyncio.SelectorEventLoop
    EventLoop.sock_accept = sock_accept
    EventLoop.sock_recv = sock_recv
    EventLoop.sock_sendall = sock_sendall
    loop = EventLoop()

    try:
        loop.run_until_complete(server(loop))
    except KeyboardInterrupt:
        pass
    finally:
        loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: bash

    # console 1
    $ python3 async_sock.py &
    $ nc localhost 9527
    Hello
    Hello

    # console 2
    $ nc localhost 9527
    asyncio
    asyncio


How does ``loop.create_server`` work?
-------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    import asyncio
    import socket

    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()

    async def create_server(loop, protocol_factory, host,
                            port, *args, **kwargs):
       sock = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET,
                            socket.SOCK_STREAM, 0)
       sock.setsockopt(socket.SOL_SOCKET,
                       socket.SO_REUSEADDR, 1)
       sock.setblocking(False)
       sock.bind((host, port))
       sock.listen(10)
       sockets = [sock]
       server = asyncio.base_events.Server(loop, sockets)
       loop._start_serving(protocol_factory, sock, None, server)

       return server


    class EchoProtocol(asyncio.Protocol):
        def connection_made(self, transport):
            peername = transport.get_extra_info('peername')
            print('Connection from {}'.format(peername))
            self.transport = transport

        def data_received(self, data):
            message = data.decode()
            self.transport.write(data)

    # Equal to: loop.create_server(EchoProtocol,
    #                              'localhost', 5566)
    coro = create_server(loop, EchoProtocol, 'localhost', 5566)
    server = loop.run_until_complete(coro)

    try:
        loop.run_forever()
    finally:
        server.close()
        loop.run_until_complete(server.wait_closed())
        loop.close()

output:

.. code-block:: bash

    # console1
    $ nc localhost 5566
    Hello
    Hello

    # console2
    $ nc localhost 5566
    asyncio
    asyncio

.. _C10k problem: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C10k_problem
.. _Valgrind: https://valgrind.org/
.. _select: https://docs.python.org/3/library/select.html
.. _selectors: https://docs.python.org/3/library/selectors.html
